{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 ScalaSansPro;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13440\viewh7800\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 I think showing that WAR overgenerates seems like a very productive, neutrally persuasive way of demonstrating that it\'92s a bad argument (at least for the EDT-er to use) against CDT; I also think the author is probably right that it should be possible to make WAR against basically any decision theory that aims at maximizing value at the actual world (or the world that will result, in the relevant sense, from the agent\'92s actions). I think Example 3 is entirely successful in demonstrating a case where CDT-Choosers predictably end up richer than EDT-Choosers; in that sense, I think the paper is entirely successful in its goal. I have some worries about the analysis given of the other cases, though. I don\'92t think Example 1 is successful in making WAR against the EDT-er, and I think Example 2 needs to be explained more clearly. I also noticed some slight notational inconsistencies; standardizing these might improve readability a bit. I also have some miscellaneous comments/suggestions that I hope might be helpful. You may not agree, but from my perspective the most important of these is that I think there's a more interesting lesson to draw from Examples 2/3 about what goes wrong with WAR.\
\
In Example 1, I don\'92t agree that CDT outperforms EDT. It looks to me like the strategy [Play; Down if Left, Up if Right] is the unique required strategy for the EDT-er, once we take the signaling value of Demon\'92s moves into account.\
\
I agree with the analysis of what the EDT-er should think at Left: the Demon\'92s predictions are extremely likely to be correct, so Down has an expected return (for the Chooser) of extremely close to 3, while Up has an expected return extremely close to 2. Chooser should play Down. Notice also that Demon\'92s return here is 3.\
\
So what if Demon plays Right? This signals that Demon thinks they can do better than 3, which can only happen at (Up, PU). So, conditional on observing Demon play Right, Chooser should have high credence that Demon is expecting Chooser to play Up (and played PU). If, at stage 2, Demon had assigned probability greater than 0.5 to Chooser playing Down at Right, Demon would have gone Left instead. (This is a little informal \'96 I\'92m not properly calculating the expectations with the chance that Demon made a mistake, but I think the point withstands more careful analysis. Chooser deciding to play Down can\'92t be good evidence that Demon played PD, because Chooser should be very confident that Demon wouldn\'92t play (Right, PD) given the fact that Demon will predict Down at Left. Playing Right makes sense for Demon only if: (1) Demon incorrectly predicts Up at Left; or (2) Demon is more confident than not that Chooser will play Up at Right. By hypothesis, Chooser should find (2) much likelier than (1) conditional on observing Right.) So Chooser should expect Demon to play PU; but even if Demon (unexpectedly) has instead played PD, Up has higher value to Chooser than Down (14 vs. 13), so there is no reason to deviate. In this sense, Demon\'92s prediction that Chooser will play Up is also self-reinforcing.\
\
This outcome (Play, Right, PU, Up) is better than Exit, and is what Chooser should predict will happen if they Play (with knowledge of Chooser\'92s strategy, Demon prefers Right to Left because 4>3), so EDT-Chooser shouldn\'92t Exit at stage 1. I think both the EDT and CDT Choosers reliably walk away with the reward of 12.\
\
I think the mistake in the analysis is assuming that EDT-Chooser plays identically in the subgame at Right, in the context of the overall game, to the way they would play if they encountered the subgame at Right detached; but this ignores evidence about Demon\'92s prediction that they get from Demon choosing Right over Left.\
\
Example 2: I think the case needs to be clearer about when, exactly, the Demon\'92s prediction of Chooser\'92s strategy occurs: is it at the beginning of the game? Do they still have access to Chooser\'92s brain (or whatever) right up until their move at stage 3 (announcing Heads or Tails)?\
\
(I also take it as given that Chooser is required to play Up at Heads worlds (whether they use EDT or CDT), so in what follows we only need to consider what happens at Tails worlds.)\
\
The analysis is simpler if Demon\'92s prediction of Chooser\'92s strategy is causally downstream of Chooser\'92s move, so let\'92s consider that version first. The coin has landed Tails. CDT-Chooser should reason: Demon\'92s prediction of my strategy causally depends on what I now do. If I play Up, I make it true (with probability arbitrarily close to 1) that Demon knows my strategy is \'93Always Up\'94. By stipulation, then Demon plays the mixed strategy of [1/2 Announce Heads, 1/2 Announce Tails], which yields an (objective chance) expected reward to me of 34.\
If I play Down, I make it true (etc.) that Demon knows my strategy is [Up if Heads, Down if Tails]; so with chance arbitrarily close to 1, I receive a reward of 36. I should play Down.\
On this version of Example 2, it seems like [Up if Heads, Down if Tails] is the only permissible strategy for the CDT-Chooser.\
\
If the Demon predicts Chooser\'92s strategy at the beginning of the game (and no backwards causation)\'85 at a Tails worlds, CDT-Chooser should reason as follows: what I do now has no causal influence on Demon\'92s prediction of my strategy; they\'92ve either predicted I will play \'93always Up\'94 or [Up if Heads, Down if Tails]. If they\'92ve predicted I\'92ll do \'93Always Up\'94, then my playing Up triggers their (stipulated) mixed strategy of [1/2 Announce Heads, 1/2 Announce Tails], which results in (T, U, AT) or (T, U, AH), each with objective chance 1/2, for expected return to me of 34. If I play Down, Demon will be surprised (their initial prediction is falsified); but given the structure of the game, they will know the coin didn\'92t land Heads. So they will Announce Tails: (T, D, T) which gives me 36. If I knew they had predicted I will play \'93Always Up\'94, I should play Down.\
\
If they\'92ve predicted I will play [Up if Heads, Down if Tails], then if I play Up, (T, U, H) results, earning me 40; if I play Down, (T, D, T) results, earning me 36. If I knew Demon had predicted that I will play [U if H, D if T], I should play Up.\
\
So what I should do depends on my credences about whether Demon has predicted \'93Always Up\'94 or [U if H, D if T] \'96 call my credence that Demon predicted \'93Always Up\'94 p.\
V(Up) = 34p + 40(1-p)\
V(Down) = 36\
\
Then I agree: it\'92s very complicated! (And depends on things like views on ratifiability, dynamics of deliberation, etc.) I know this is a short paper and explaining the verdicts of CDT in this case isn\'92t really the focus, but I still think the argument would be clearer with just a little more explanation of this case (assuming that I\'92m understanding the point correctly!); and as I already flagged, I think even getting the verdict that CDT can permit \'93Always Up\'94 depends on the \'93causal timing\'94 of the Demon\'92s prediction of Chooser\'92s strategy, so I think that needs to be clarified.\
\
There are some notational inconsistencies that it might be helpful to fix:\
- Example 1, stage 1: standardize Exit vs. Out (I\'92m assuming these are meant to be the same thing)\
- Table 2.1: Demon\'92s moves are listed as U/T; I think this is meant to be H/T. (It might also be helpful, as you do for some of the other predictions, to give these a different notation like PH, PT or AH, AT to distinguish from how the coin actually lands.)\
-       Example 3: using Up/Down as the name for Chooser's options in the subgame at (Tails, Down, Announce Tails) is a little confusing, given that Chooser's options at stage 2 are also named this way; why not call them (and Demon's options in this subgame) something else?\
\
Finally, I have some comments/suggestions that I hope might be helpful (no need to engage with these if not):\
\
- If Example 1 were a case where CDT outperformed EDT, and EDT-proponents had a plausible case that this is because of \'93unfairness\'94 of the game towards EDT-Choosers, I don\'92t think the point that an EDT-Chooser decides to Exit before Demon makes a move would help at all with mitigating this charge of unfairness.\
Choosing not to play a (sub)game that you (let\'92s suppose) correctly believe is rigged against you doesn\'92t undermine your complaint that the game is rigged.\
- Similarly, I think the point that the Demon is only trying to maximize their own payout is basically irrelevant to a charge of unfairness. The question is whether the structure of the game is \'93fair\'94 in the relevant sense; there needn\'92t be any accusation of malice on Demon\'92s part.\
- (Suppose, as I think is plausible, CDT proponents have a reasonable case that the standard Newcomb problem amounts to rewarding 1-boxers for their irrationality. Then surely this complaint is reasonable whether the Predictor has some desire to reward one-boxers and contrived the game themselves or is just responding to a reward/loss function that incentivizes making correct predictions in a game structure set up by someone else, with unknown motives. The fairness of the structure is what\'92s really at issue.)\
- I think there\'92s a collection of WAR arguments against EDT from proponents of Functional Decision Theory around online somewhere; it might be worth looking into (if you haven\'92t already). (I know FDT-proponents cite Transparent Newcomb as a case where FDT reliably outperforms both EDT and CDT, who both two-box. I\'92m partial to the idea that the verdict you should one-box in Transparent Newcomb is itself a reductio of WAR-reasoning.)\
- The thing that I think is most interesting about Example 2 isn\'92t quite the lesson you take from it. What I find most interesting is this: the main incentive to play Up at Tails worlds is not to achieve more value at worlds consistent with Tails; the main benefit (in WAR terms) is that it enriches \'93you\'94 (or your counterparts) at worlds where (counterfactually!) the coin landed Heads.\
I don\'92t think it\'92s really about unpredictability (although muddying the signal is how it happens to function in this case, that seems clearly inessential); I think the fundamental move is the agent\'92s maximization of value at worlds consistent with observed reality conflicting with the strategy that will predictably make them richer in expectation across all worlds (including worlds known to be both non-actual and causally inaccessible from the point where the agent is making their choice). If the EDT-Chooser was willing to knowingly sacrifice utility at Tails worlds by playing a strategy that they think performs worse in those cases (Always Up), their ensemble of counterparts (across both Heads and Tails worlds) would be significantly richer in expectation. I think this is the central issue with the WAR argument: being the kind of agent that gets as expectedly rich as possible across all worlds can come apart from trying to maximize utility (from either the causalist or evidentialist stance) at the worlds you take to be possible/causally accessible at the moment of decision.\
\
(E.g., Transparent Newcomb is a case where being the kind of agent that gets rich arguably demands one-boxing; but maximizing wealth at worlds that might be actual or causally accessible at the moment of the agent's decision clearly requires two-boxing; and this is not because of unpredictability, but just the content of the Predictor's prediction: one-boxing or two-boxing.)}