In his 1981 paper, "From Worlds to Possibilities", Lloyd Humberstone shows a way to do modal logic without the apparatus of possible worlds. Instead of worlds he uses _possibilities_, which may, unlike worlds, be incomplete. The non-modal parts of the view are discussed again in section 6.44 of _The Connectives_, though the differences between the view there and the 1981 view are largely presentational. In the models Humberstone develops, there are two important binary relations between points. One is the familiar accessibility relation $R$, where $xRy$ means roughly that $y$ is possible from $x$. The other is a new *refinement* relation $\geq$, where $y \geq x$ means that $y$ is a refinement of $x$. If we think of the possibilities $x$ and $y$ as _stories_, which settle some things but leave others out, then $y \geq x$ means that you can create the story $y$ by starting with $x$ and adding some things, but subtracting nothing. Humberstone puts some fairly tight constraints both on $\geq$ itself, and on the interaction between $\geq$ and $R$, and between $\geq$ and the valuation function $V$, with the result that despite the incompleteness in the worlds, we get back classical modal logic(s).

Recently, Wesley @Holliday2025 has published a massive study of the possibilities approach to modal logic. His approach differs from Humberstone's in some respects. For one thing, he discusses multi-modal logics, which Humberstone did not. (Though it isn't hard to generalise to them.) More importantly, he prefers slightly weaker constraints $\geq$. He calls frames satisfy Humberstone's original constraints _Humberstone frames_, and frames that satisfy his weaker conditions _full possibility frames_. Using an ingenious construction, he shows that there is a class of full possibility frames which determines a logic that cannot be determined by any class of Kripke frames. But the construction does not satisfy the more demanding constraints on Humberstone frames, and he leaves it as an open question whether there is a class of Humberstone frames 
