In HoPF.qmd, the section "Logics Definable on Humberstone Frames" should include this content

- In Holliday's-question.txt, there is a question about which inclusion is strict. We need to summarise what question Holliday is asking here.
- We are not going to answer the question precisely as asked. But we can answer a related question. If we expand the language to include infintary disjunction, then the first inclusion is strict. That is, there are logics definable on Humberstone frames but not definable on Kripke frames.
- In fact we will just use a single frame. It consists of two copies of the set of finite binary sequences. For each finite binary sequence, say we have a left-handed version and a right-handed version. The refinement relation is that $x \leqslant y$ iff $x$ and $y$ have the same handedness, and $x$ is an initial segment of $y$.
- We now define two infinite classes of accessibility relations.
- The first class goes from left-to-right. $xR^{\rightarrow}_{k}y$ iff $x$ is left-handed, $y$ is right-handed, $y$ is of length at least $k$, and $x$ is either an initial segment of $y$, or the first $k$ elements of $x$ are an initial segment of $y$. This is defined for $k \geqslant 0$. The special case of $k = 0$ just means $x$ is left-handed and $y$ is right-handed.
- Here's how to picture $R^{\rightarrow}_{k}$. Each of the sets of sequences, the left-handed and right-handed, form trees in a familiar way. Imagine there are bridges between the left-handed and right-handed trees when the sequences are identical and of length $k$. Then $xR^{\rightarrow}_{k}y$ if there is a path from the top to bottom of the tree that starts with $x$, takes a bridge, and continues along (and beyond) $y$.
- We need to show this definition satisfies all three Humberstone constraints.
- The second class goes from right-to-left. $xR^{\leftarrow}_{k}y$ if $x$ is right-handed, and does not have 0 in its $k$'th position, either because it is length less than $k$, or because it has one there, and $y$ is left-handed. This is defined for $k > 0$
- We again need to show that this definition also satisfies all three of the Humberstone constraints.



Quantifiers Section

There are two distinctive features of the way that I introduced quantifiers in @sec-formal. First, I introduced the universal quantifier as basic, and simply defined $\exists$ as $\neg \forall \neg$. Second, I introduced the universal quantifier as _possibilist_, at least in the sense that it ranges over all objects in a possibility and all its refinements. As I noted, there is a passing remark in "From Worlds to Possibilities" where Humberstone suggests that is how he would do it. It's worth going over why this ends up being the best way to do things.

The aim here, as it was in @sec-formal, was to keep classical logic while still using things, like incomplete possibilities, which are usually taken to be incompatible with classical logic. But in this section the primary contrast is not with non-classical propositional logics, but with free logics. In classical logic, this argument looks fairly compelling.

\begin{align*}
1. && a = a && \text{=Intro} \\
2. && \exists x(x = a) && \exists\text{-Introduction} \\
3. && \Box \exists x(x = a) && \text{Necessitation} \\
4. && \forall y \Box \exists x(x = y) && \forall-\text{Introduction}
5. && \Box \forall y \Box \exists x(x = y) && \text{Necessitation}
\end{align*}

That is, for every thing, necessarily every object is such that necessarily, something is identical to it. If we are working in a possible worlds framework, and assume that the modal logic we're using is at least as strong as **KTB**, that just about implies that all worlds have the same domain. Strictly speaking, it's consistent with there being worlds with distinct domains which are not connected by the ancestral of $R$, but any world that could be relevant to the truth of any sentence, must have the same domain.

In the possibilities framework, we have a bit more flexibility while still making claims like $\Box \forall y \Box \exists x(x = y)$ come out true. One option would be to say that all refinements, and indeed all accessible possibilities, have the same domain, and have quantifiers just range over objects within a possibility. This would be a nice way to handle quantifiers, but having all possibilities have the same domain would be seriously unintuitive. Some stories have more characters than others. In the story that consists of one proposition, Romeo loves Juliet, it feels like the domain should just consist of Romeo and Juliet. On the other hand, since we want it to be a logical truth that exists in XX = curio we can’t have the domain of the quantify range dust over Romeo and Juliet.

We could try and say, that because that’s an existential qualifier, perhaps it’s still okay to have the only things in the domain be Romeo and Juliet. Perhaps as long as the existential qualifier is witnessed by something in a later refinement, we can have small domains. But there is still a problem if the domain is just Romeo and Juliet, and universal qualifiers only range over the domain of that possibility, then the sentence all X bracket X equals Romeo or X equals Juliet) will come out true if that’s true, and it’s also true that Mercurio equals Mercurio since that’s a logical truth, then we get that Mercurio and that equal Romeo or the identical with the yet. And we don’t want that, because there is clearly a refinement of our simple story where a show exists and is neither Romeo it’s Juliet. Shakespeare’s play for example is such a refinement?

So it looks like we are forced to say that qualify range over future refinements as well as the actual possibility. Is there any way to talk about what’s just true and the possibility? HT suggests that we can do this by adding a special predicate E for exists. Then if we wanted to say that everything in the possibility is F, we could just say AX bracket EX right arrow FX. That’s on the right track, but it can’t be right as it stands. The problem is that we want all our predicates to be persistent and refine for the logic to work. And the special predicate E only applies to Romeo and Juliet would not be referable.

A better option, is to use some kind of demonstrated it. There are two possibilities here. One is that we might introduce a new plural referring term U. Imagine introducing this well waving your arms around and saying that it refers to us. The the thought is that Ux does not mean that ex exists, it means ex is one of us. If Romeo or Juliet would to introduce U that way in their possibility, then the claim that Mercurio is one of us as they say it would be false. And this is not a failure of refinement. The demonstrate as a kind of designator that that picks out the things in that possibility and picks them out no matter which later possibility you go into what’s needed for persistence is that the content of the crime keeps its truth value, even if the words are used to introduce that claim would pick out a sentence with a different truth value in a different world.

It might be more intuitive, rather than having this special plural demonstrative capital U, to state introduce a name for the world call it a. Then we could have a restricted quantify that said everything that is in a is F, the main intuitively that everything in the domain is. Again a has to be treated as a recently referring name, so if we say that that everything in the world is F, that’s true even in later refinements that include things that aren’t F. As with the idea that we could introduce a demonstrative for us, the important thing for the logic is that the content is persistent and referable, and this can be true even if the character is not.

Once we understand restricted qualification in this way, the possibilities framework has interesting interactions with recent debates about necessity ism. Following Williamson 2013, a lot of people have become become interested in their idea that everything exist necessarily. One really quick argument for that claim is the argument given above. We can prove in classical logic that as a matter of necessity, everything must exist. That is, everything exists necessarily. On the face of it, this is a quite implausible principle. Some things that don’t exist, like Romeo, Juliet, Sherlock Holmes, and Dr Watson, could have existed.

In the possibilities framework, this objection is easy to handle. What’s intuitively true is that the fictional characters are not one of us. They are not in the world. If I ordinary qualifies the range Rover things that are one of us, or things that are in the world, then we can explain white and intuitive to say that in a more abstract sense that is relevant to the under strict existential qualify, Romeo Juliet Holmes and Watson all exist.

Alternatively, I might use this kind of framework to argue against necessity. Here’s a really quick argument for Necess ism. Classical logic logic to use. S5 is the right model logic to use. Within Classical S5, we can prove that everything necessarily. In the possible world framework, the only way to have that come out right is to have a constant domain semantics.